Hello friends
In this video we're going to discuss about the importance
bit wise operators
So so far we have performed operations on byte level
For example a character takes one byte
We can store and access one byte of data using
the char data type. The integer and float
datatypes take four bytes
And using this we can store and access 4 bytes
of data.
Similarly double takes eight bytes and using this we can
store and access eight bytes of data
Now let's go
One step further. The char data type takes one
byte of data which is 8 bits
The ASCII value of 'a' is 97
So 97's 8 bit binary value 01100001 will be
stored in it. Now how can access each and every
bit of this char value? Is it possible? The answer
is yes
We can access each and every bit of memory using
bit wise operators. The bit wise operators do not see
the integer 97 here.
Instead it sees the binary bits
That is 01100001 here.
So for an example if we want to set the
last bit 1 to 0
We can do it using bitwise AND operator simply put
0 in the position where we want to set the
bit to 0 and set other bits
to 1. that is in bit wise AND operation
If the inputs are 0 0 the output will be 0
If the inputs are 0 1 again the output is 0
Also if it is 1 0 the result is again 0
and only if the input is 1 and 1 then only
the output is 1.
So if we perform bitwise AND on the above
value with this, the last bit will be set to
Similarly if we want to enable the bit again
we can achieve it using with bitwise OR operator simply put 1
in the position where we want to set the bit
to 1 and set other bits to 0. that is in
bitwise OR operation
If the inputs are 0 0 output will be 0
If the inputs are 0 1 the output will be 1 also
If it is 1 0 then also the result is 1
and if the inputs are 1 and 1 then also
the output is 1
So if we perform bit wise OR on the above
value with this, the last bit will be set to
1 again
We will discuss this operations elaborately in the upcoming videos
Now let us discuss how bit wise operators can be
useful in the real life
We all know traffic signal
It will have three signals red, yellow and green
Let us assume three bits are reserved for each signal
and all are set to zero
If we want to show the red signal we need
to enable the third so we can do it using
the OR operator
So take 1 in the place where we want to
enable the  bit and 0 in the remaining bits that
is 100 now perform bit wise OR with 000 So third
bit will be enabled and the red signal will be
shown. Now to turn red off or disable
That bit we can use bitwise AND operator
So take 0 in the place where we want to
disable the bit that is 000 and perform AND operation
and we will get 000. That is red will be
turned OFF. now we need to turn green ON that is
first bit should be enabled. For that again use bitwise
OR operator and to turn this bit on take 1
in that position.
So we got 001 and perform bitwise OR and we
got the result 001. That is green light is turned
ON
So we have many such applications of bit wise operators
now let us see which are the bit wise operators
We have bitwise OR, bitwise AND,  bitwise XOR
bitwise left shift operator,  bitwise right shift operator and
bitwise
one's compliment operator in the upcoming videos we will discuss
each bit wise
Operators elaborately.